 
CP 318: Data Science for Smart City Applications  
Project 2 Report(Team -EPSILON)  
 
Question A1. Similarity Measures:  
1) Land Use : This category tells about how the land usage is distributed between different sectors such 
as commer cial, residential, industrial, etc. As an additional feature, we added the population density 
and total area of the suburban  which we felt would have an immense impact over the land u sage .  
Aim: To a nalyze how the land u sage is distribu ted among  suburb s and find any similarity if any.  
Justification : Choice of features is such that, suburbs with similar total are a or similar population 
density will have similar land u sage distribution . 
Method : Used Manhattan distance as the similarity measure of comparison. The labels are 
converted  to integer tokens. N ull values are filled by zeros.  
 
2) Services : This feature talks  about the facilities and utility resources present in a suburb.  We used all 
the features in the category . 
Aim:  Services points about amenities a place has and therefore also indirectly points towards the 
cost of living in a suburb. This feature becomes im portant when we want to build some new facility 
in the area  or want to buy a house in the area.  As all data was present in numerical form, so there 
was no need of explicitly transforming the data.  
Method : Used Euclidean  distance as the similarity measure of comparison.  
 
3) Socio -Demographic : It talks about how a suburb has developed as a whole and how much land is 
occupied for what purpose such as Commercial, Industrial, Residential, Rura l or something other. As 
all data was present in numerical form, so there was no need of explicitly transforming the data.  
Aim:  This measure tells us proportion of land used for each purpose which can be further helpful in 
policy development decisions such  as there should be more hospitals and schools in suburbs where 
proportion of Rural and Residential is more than others.  
Method : Used Minkowski  distance  with p = 3  as the similarity measure of comparison.  
 
Question A2. Multidimensional Scaling method:  
1. Land Use : Figure 1 depicts the MDS scatter plot of Land use c ategory  using Manhattan Distance  
2. Services : Figure 2 depicts the MDS scatter plot of Services  category  using Euclidean Distance  
3. Socio -Demographic : Figure 3 depicts the MDS scatter plot of Socio -Demographic  category  using 
Minkowski Distance.  
 
• Some suburb pairs look similar  in all the MDS  such as St Kilda and So uth Yarra , North Cote and 
Malvern East , Tyabb and Somerville  are found to be of same proximity under all the three MDS  
• We expected that the suburbs which have similar land use should have somewhat similar  services 
available but we observed some suburbs conflicting this claim such as  Prah ran and Windsor , St 
Andrew Bridge and Port Melbourne and Parkville and Springvale,  Prahran and Windsor , Malvern East 
and Noble Park  are near in Land usage but far in Ser vice MDS  this could be due to the fact that some 
areas are more developed as compared to other  and therefore providing more services.  
• We Expected  the suburbs which are near in Socio Demo graphy would be near in Geography Measure 
but there were some conflicts like  Noble Park and Glenroy , St Kilda and South Yarra , Spring vale and 
Braybrook , Northcote and Malvern East  as these were foun d to be far in Geogr aphy but near in  Socio 
Demography  
 
Question A3. Geographical Proximity : 
Figure 4 and 5 depi cts the MDS scatter plot of Geographical location of suburbs using two different proximity 
measures – Euclidean and Minkowsk i (p = 4) dista nce. 
Method:  The location feature is decomposed into two diff erent features – distance and direction. Distance 
says how far the suburb is from Melbou rne (in kms) and Direction f eature says the angl e in which the suburb 
is present from Melbourne (in degree) . These are scaled using MinMaxScaler.  
The distance between suburbs in th ese plots are compared between the distance between the suburbs 
obtained  in other category. It is found out that  the similar suburbs are closer in proximity , which are 
depicted in the Figure 12.  
Question B1. 
Featu re Selection usin g Supervised Learning:  
We selected most important features from all the features for a given  suburb using the Feature selection 
technique o f using Supervised Learning technique – Logistic Regression on the suburb prediction task along 
with L1 regularize r with large regularizing  const ant lambda . 
Result:  We obtained 34 features from the model  with lamb da = 50.  
Importa nt Features:  'Population Density', '2012 ERP age 20 -24, persons', '2012 ERP 
age 25-44, persons', '2012 ERP age 45 -64, persons', '2012 ERP, total', '2007 
ERP age 20 -24, persons', '2007 ERP age 25 -44, persons', '2007 ERP age 45 -64, 
persons', '2007 ERP age 85+, persons', '2007 ERP, total', '% change, 2007 -
2012, age 80 -84', '% change, 2007 -2012, age 85+', 'Number of Households', 
'Occupied private dwellings', 'Population in non -private dwellings', 'Public 
Housing Dwellings', 'Personal inco me <$400/week, persons', 'IRSD (min)', 
'IRSD (max)', 'IRSD (avg)', 'Holds degree or higher, persons', 'Did not 
complete year 12, persons', 'Volunteers, persons', 'Unpaid carer of children, 
persons', 'Born overseas, persons', 'Born in non -English speaking c ountry, 
persons', 'Speaks LOTE at home, persons', 'Top country of birth, persons', 
'2nd top country of birth, persons', 'Top language spoken, persons', '2nd top 
language spoken, persons', 'Public hospital separations, 2012 -13', 
'Presentations to emergency departments, 2012 -13', 'Category 4 & 5 emergency 
department presentations ' 
 
Unsupervised Clustering  using Selected Features : 
We found out 5 clusters of suburbs present using the obtained important features  which can seen in Figure 6 
and Figure 7 
 
Question B2. 
Figure 8, 9 , 10 and 11 shows th at using these 34 features, all the other features and develop ment of a 
suburb c an be found out. The figures show  that each cluster having different land use distrib utions and th e 
suburbs in a cl uster are almost from the same neighbo rhood.  
 
Question B3. 
This analysis helps in finding the o ptimal parameters for development of a suburb. So  that the government 
while doing the city planning  can consider these features and plan for the future development by which the 
infrastructure and ser vice facilities of the suburbs always remain optimal.   
       
                           Figure 1                                                                                                                               Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                            Figure 3                                                                                                                                  Figure 4 
  
 

 
Figure 5 
 
     
                                     Figure 6                                                                                                                   Figure 7 
 
 
  
                                       Figure 8                                                                                                                       Figure 9 

 
 
   
                                          Figure 10                                                                                                                 Figure 11 
 
 
                                                                                                       Figure 12 

